---
layout: post
title: About me
date: 2020-01-01
---

<!-- 一個固執的強迫症人、一個愛思考愛探究的geek、一個熱愛自由自主的GNU/Linux-er、一個社會問題關注者。-->  
<!--和伪人类学人、前儿童心理学工作者、前社会工作者。 -->   
> 一個 GNU/Linux geek，自由主义者，思考创伤和苦痛、社群和冲突、压迫和自由、民主和暴政。   
A GNU/Linux geek, liberalist, who loves freedom and autonomy. A thinker of trauma and distress, society and conflicts, oppression and freedom. A pseudo anthropologist, a survivor of psychiatry.  


## My Experiences  
- I studied psychology/psychiatry during 2002~2012;   
- I was a social worker / ethnographer during 2009~2012;  
- and studied Anthropology and community youth work during 2012~2013;  
- Since 2014 I worked in a China-based NGO to working with the community of people with psychosocial disabilities in China, empowering them to be more independent both legally and in their daily lives;  
- From 2016 to 2017, I worked in another local NGO to do research on Chinese education and birth control policies, as well as facilitating community work along with the migrant workers and their children.   

- I am a GNU/Linux lover and have been long involved in the global open source software communities.  
- I have been providing online privacy support and anti-surveillance/anti-censorship training/consultation for NGOers/activists as well as the general public.  


## My Projects
- [Digital-rights: 數字權利翻譯系列](https://github.com/mdrights/Digital-rights) -Translation of EFF, Tor, Tails and other tech and policies of online privacy. #antis:matrix.org (Matrix)  #DigitalRightsCN @ freenode.net

- [中文化隐私加强操作系统: antiS (LiveSlak)](https://github.com/mdrights/LiveSlak) -一款面向中文用户的，可用于對抗监控和取證的隐私加強版操作系统（请看[LiveSlak 介绍](https://mdrights.github.io/os-observe/Liveslak-intro/)。 A Chinese-oriented, privacy-enhanced OS based on Slackware Live with some privacy-focused applications installed. 

- [CSObot 機器人](https://github.com/mdrights/CSObot) - 一個關心中國公民社會的機器人。平臺：IRC: #aqi-data-share @ oftc.net; Matrix: #csobot:matrix.org

- [os-observe: 在線隱私安全的筆記](https://mdrights.github.io/os-observe) - 幫助自己和他人抵抗“1984”。My observation and practices on online privacy and anti-surveillance/anti-censorship.

- [Slackwarecn SlackBuilds](https://github.com/slackwarecn-slackbuilds) 为 Slackware GNU/Linux 贡献的软件构建安装脚本。其中很多用于我自己的 LiveSlak。  

- [CRPD-l10n-zh](https://github.com/mdrights/CRPD-l10n-zh) - CRPD(联合国身心障礙者權利公約）相關資源翻譯。CRPD and related resources localisation repo.


<!-- 
## Other Interests
- Psychiatric survivor movement in China: [精神科倖存者運動在中國]({{ site.baseurl }}/beyond-psychiatry) - 兼[TCI-Asia 社區融合轉型聯盟](https://transformingcommunitiesforinclusion.wordpress.com/)翻譯跟進。 

- A collaborative platform for social policy participation in China: [mirror-CN: 鏡像拆那——公共政策參與平臺 ]({{ site.baseurl }}/mirror-CN)  
-->

## List of Skills
- Technical:  
	- Linux/UNIX Operating System Administration; server maintaining; Unix Shell/Python Programming 
	- Linux/UNIX system security hardening, from Kerberos to kernel hardening
	- Online privacy / anonimity techniques and strategies
	- Favourite IDE: Vim
	- Favourite Languages: Unix Shell, Python

- Non-tech:
	- Ethnographic research methods
	- Anthropological/sociological study
	- Advanced communication skills (especially with people with psychosocial distress/disabilities)
	- Grouping and organizing techniques with the marginalized communities
	- Social policy advocacy and approaches study
	- Individual, legal action support 
	- Workshop/Training design and facilitation
	- Project and organizational management, planning and financing for NGOs
	- Playback Theatre and Forum Theatre player and conductor


## Warrant Canary

这是[「金丝雀」](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Warrant_canary)，如果我飞走了，请不要联系我所有以`mdrights`为名的帐号；没飞走，说明我还安全。  
兄弟爬山，各自找路。万事小心。

